What is the purpose of National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal?
This portal is an initiative of Government of India to facilitate victims and complainants to report cyber crime complaints online. This portal caters all types of cyber crime complaints including complaints pertaining to online Child Sexual Exploitative and Abuse Material (CSEAM) or sexually explicit content such as Rape/Gang Rape (RGR) content and other cyber crimes such as mobile crimes, online and social media crimes, online financial frauds, ransomware, hacking, cryptocurrency crimes and online cyber trafficking.

The portal also provides an option of reporting an anonymous complaint for reporting online or sexually explicit content such as Rape/Gang Rape (RGR) content.

What is CSEAM - Child Sexual Exploitative and Abuse Material?
Child Sexual Exploitative and Abuse Material (CSEAM) refers to material containing sexual image in any form, of a child who is abused or sexually exploited. Section 67 (B) of IT Act states that it is punishable for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually explicit act in electronic form.

Apart from this portal, are there any alternative ways to remove objectionable content from social media websites?
Yes, most of the social media websites like Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and Instagram have the option of reporting or flagging the objectionable contents. The social media platforms may take appropriate action based on the contents reported to them as per their content policy.

Which type of cybercrimes can I report on the portal?
There are two options for reporting cybercrimes on the portal.
Report Crime related to Women and Child - Under this section you can report complaints pertaining to online CSEAM or sexually explicit content such as Rape/Gang Rape RGR content.
Report Other Cybercrimes - Under this option you can report complaints pertaining to cybercrimes such as mobile crimes, online and social media crimes, online financial frauds, ransomware, hacking, cryptocurrency crimes and online cyber trafficking.

What kind of information should I provide to report a complaint?
There are two options for filing a report on cybercrime.gov.in. First is Report Crime related to Women and Child and second is Report Other Cybercrimes.
In case of Report Crime related to Women and Child there are two ways of registering your complaint.
Report Anonymously - You can report crimes related to online Rape or Gang Rape RGR content anonymously. You do not need to provide any personal information. However information related to the complaint should be accurate and complete for the police authorities to take necessary action.
Report and Track - Under this option fields marked with a red asterisk are mandatory. It is important that the police authorities receive accurate and complete information related to the complaint. You should provide required information such as your name, phone number, email address, details of the complaint and necessary information supporting the complaint. Initially register yourself using your name and valid Indian mobile number. You will receive a One Time Password OTP on your mobile number. The OTP remains valid for 30 minutes only. Once you successfully register your mobile number on the portal you will be able to report the complaint.

Which State or UT should I select while reporting a complaint?
In case of filing a complaint under Report Crime related to Women and Child section by using Report Anonymously option, the victim location or State or UT where the incident happened should be selected. If it is a report pertaining to website hosting Rape or Gang Rape RGR content, complainant may select his or her current State or UT of residence. As a responsible citizen kindly use Report and Track option for reporting the crime since it would help the law enforcement agencies to contact you for providing further details.

How can I file complaints about other cybercrimes?
In case of other cybercrimes you can opt for Report Other Cybercrimes section. You are required to register yourself using your name and valid Indian mobile number. You will receive a One Time Password OTP on your mobile number. The OTP remains valid for 30 minutes only. Once you successfully register your mobile number on the portal you will be able to report the complaint by selecting appropriate category and sub category. Fields marked with a red asterisk are mandatory. You should provide required information such as your name, phone number, email address, details of the complaint and necessary information supporting the complaint.

What type of information would be considered as evidence while filing my complaint?
It is important to keep any evidence you may have related to your complaint. Evidence may include credit card receipt, bank statement, envelope if received a letter or item through mail or courier, brochure or pamphlet, online money transfer receipt, copy of email, URL of webpage, chat transcripts, suspect mobile number screenshot, videos, images, and any other kind of document.

What action will be taken if complainant reports any false complaint or information?
Providing false information could make the complainant liable to penal action as per the Indian Penal Code.

Can I report a complaint without uploading any information?
It is recommended that you provide as much information about the complaint as possible so that the police authorities working on the complaint are able to take appropriate and prompt action.

What happens once I report a complaint?
The complaints reported on the portal shall be handled by the concerned State or UT police authorities based on your selection of State or UT while reporting the complaint.

Will I be informed that my complaint has been submitted successfully?
Yes once your complaint is submitted you will receive a confirmation message in the portal itself. In case you have filed a complaint through Report and Track option or Report Other Cybercrime section available on the portal you will receive a SMS and an email with a complaint reference number on your registered mobile number and email id.

Can I check the status of my complaint?
You will be able to check status of your complaint if you have reported the complaint using Report and Track option or Report Other Cybercrime section available on the portal. The complainant will receive an acknowledgement number which can be used to track the progress of the complaint by logging on the portal and clicking on check status option.

Can I withdraw my complaint from the portal?
A complaint filed under Report Women and Child Related Crime section cannot be withdrawn. Complaint filed under Report Cyber Crime section can be withdrawn before it is converted into FIR.

What is Hash value and what is its purpose?
Hash value is an alpha numeric value of a fixed length that uniquely identifies data. Hash value acts as a unique fingerprint or number to a digital file you upload as evidence in the portal such as images, videos, documents. The hash value that you receive will ensure the integrity of digital evidence uploaded on the portal.

Can I file a complaint if I am an Indian citizen but have been victimized online by a foreign national or company?
Yes you may file a complaint related to all types of cyber crime on the portal.

Can I file a complaint if I have been victimized online by an individual or company in India but I am not a citizen of India?
Yes you can register a complaint on the portal by selecting an appropriate section and option of reporting a complaint pertaining to cybercrime. Report Crime related to Women and Child - Under this section you can report complaints pertaining to online CSEAM or sexually explicit content such as Rape/Gang Rape RGR content. There are options to register complaint under this section. Report Anonymously - You can report crimes related to online Rape or Gang Rape RGR content anonymously. You do not need to provide any personal information. However information related to the complaint should be accurate and complete for the police authorities to take necessary action. Report and Track - Under this option kindly register yourself using your name and valid Indian mobile number. You will receive a One Time Password OTP on your mobile number. The OTP remains valid for 30 minutes only. Report Other Cybercrimes - Under this section you can report complaints pertaining to cybercrimes such as mobile crimes, online and social media crimes, online financial frauds, ransomware, hacking, cryptocurrency crimes and online cyber trafficking.